Add tracing how-to guide (#2026)
nginxinc/nginx-gateway-fabric: site/content/how-to/monitoring/tracing.md

jaeger-8469f69b86-bfpk9          1/1     Running   0          9s
otel-collector-f786b7dfd-h2x9l   1/1     Running   0          9s
```

Once running, you can access the Jaeger dashboard by using port-forwarding in the background:

```shell
kubectl port-forward -n monitoring svc/jaeger 16686:16686 &
```

Visit [http://127.0.0.1:16686](http://127.0.0.1:16686) to view the dashboard.

## Enable tracing

To enable tracing, you must configure two resources:

- `NginxProxy`: This resource contains global settings relating to the NGINX data plane. It is created and managed by the [cluster operator](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/), and is referenced in the `parametersRef` field of the GatewayClass. This resource can be created and linked when we install NGINX Gateway Fabric using its helm chart, or it can be added later. This guide installs the resource using the helm chart, but the resource can also be created for an existing deployment.

  The `NginxProxy` resource contains configuration for the collector, and applies to all Gateways and routes under the GatewayClass. It does not enable tracing, but is a prerequisite to the next piece of configuration.

> - `ObservabilityPolicy`: This resource is a [Policy](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/policy-attachment/) that targets HTTPRoutes or GRPCRoutes. It is created by the [application developer](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/) and enables tracing for a specific route or routes. It requires the `NginxProxy` resource to exist in order to complete the tracing configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ObservabilityPolicy`: This resource is a [Direct PolicyAttachment](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/policy-attachment/) that targets HTTPRoutes or GRPCRoutes. It is created by the [application developer](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/) and enables tracing for a specific route or routes. It requires the `NginxProxy` resource to exist in order to complete the tracing configuration.
```

---
title: "Tracing"
description: "Learn how to configure tracing in NGINX Gateway Fabric."
weight: 200
toc: true
docs: "DOCS-000"
---

{{<custom-styles>}}

## Overview

> NGINX Gateway Fabric supports tracing using [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/). The official [NGINX OpenTelemetry Module](https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-otel) instruments the NGINX data plane to export traces to a configured collector. Tracing data can be exported to an OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) exporter, such as the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector). This collector can then export data to one or more upstream collectors like [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/), [DataDog](https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/), and many others. This particular model is called the [Agent model](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/deployment/agent/).

Reviewer 2: Is this supposed to be "instruments"? 

```suggestion
NGINX Gateway Fabric supports tracing using [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/). The official [NGINX OpenTelemetry Module](https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-otel) instructs the NGINX data plane to export traces to a configured collector. Tracing data can be exported to an OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) exporter, such as the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector). This collector can then export data to one or more upstream collectors like [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/), [DataDog](https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/), and many others. This particular model is called the [Agent model](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/deployment/agent/).
```

Author: Yeah, kind of like "configures".

First, create the namespace:

```shell
kubectl create namespace monitoring
```

Download the following files containing the configurations for the collectors:

- {{< download "otel-collector.yaml" "otel-collector.yaml" >}}
- {{< download "jaeger.yaml" "jaeger.yaml" >}}

{{< note >}}These collectors are for demo purposes and are not tuned for production use.{{< /note >}}

and install:

```shell
kubectl apply -f otel-collector.yaml -f jaeger.yaml -n monitoring
```

Ensure that the Pods are running:

```shell
kubectl -n monitoring get pods
```

```text
NAME                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
jaeger-8469f69b86-bfpk9          1/1     Running   0          9s
otel-collector-f786b7dfd-h2x9l   1/1     Running   0          9s
```

Once running, you can access the Jaeger dashboard by using port-forwarding in the background:

```shell
kubectl port-forward -n monitoring svc/jaeger 16686:16686 &
```

Visit [http://127.0.0.1:16686](http://127.0.0.1:16686) to view the dashboard.

## Enabling Tracing

> Enabling tracing requires two pieces of configuration. The first is a resource called `NginxProxy`, which contains global settings relating to the NGINX data plane. This resource is created and managed by the [cluster operator](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/), and is referenced in the `parametersRef` field of the GatewayClass. This resource can be created and linked when we install NGINX Gateway Fabric using its helm chart, or it can be added later. In this guide we will install the resource using the helm chart, but will also show what it looks like in case you want to add it after installation.

Reviewer 3: nit: I suggest using a list here, for better structure/readability

Enabling tracing requires two pieces of configuration
* _NginxProxy_ ...
* _ObservabilityPolicy_ ...

apiVersion: gateway.nginx.org/v1alpha1
kind: ObservabilityPolicy
metadata:
  name: coffee
spec:
  targetRefs:
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: HTTPRoute
    name: coffee
  tracing:
    strategy: ratio
    ratio: 50
    spanAttributes:
    - key: coffee-key
      value: coffee-value
EOF
```

This policy attaches to the coffee HTTPRoute and enables ratio-based tracing, where 50% of requests will be sampled. We've also included a span attribute to add extra data to the spans.

Let's check the status of the policy:

```shell
kubectl describe observabilitypolicies.gateway.nginx.org coffee
```

```text
Status:
  Ancestors:
    Ancestor Ref:
      Group:      gateway.networking.k8s.io
      Kind:       HTTPRoute
      Name:       coffee
      Namespace:  default
    Conditions:
      Last Transition Time:  2024-05-23T18:13:03Z
      Message:               Policy is accepted
      Observed Generation:   1
      Reason:                Accepted
      Status:                True
      Type:                  Accepted
    Controller Name:         gateway.nginx.org/nginx-gateway-controller
```

The policy is accepted, so now let's send some more traffic.

```shell

> for i in $(seq 1 10); do curl --resolve cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT:$GW_IP http://cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT/coffee; sleep 1; done

Reviewer 3: will it work on Windows?

Author: Probably not. Think it's worth having a separate command for windows, or just have the curl command and say "run this command 10 times"?

Reviewer 3: > t have the curl command and say "run this command 10 times"?

sounds good
is 10 times necessary? of a few times is enough

Author: Nah, I can reduce that

---
title: "Tracing"

> description: "Learn how to configure tracing in NGINX Gateway Fabric."

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

We shouldn't be using the description field, as although it currently displays at the top of pages, this is actually a bug and will create extra work in the future once it's fixed. I've added a suggestion to add this to the top of the page in the body text.

weight: 200
toc: true
docs: "DOCS-000"
---

> {{<custom-styles>}}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Learn how to configure tracing in NGINX Gateway Fabric.
```

Shifted description from the frontmatter: the custom styles shortcode is also no longer necessary, as they're the defaults in the theme now.

## Overview

> NGINX Gateway Fabric supports tracing using [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/). The official [NGINX OpenTelemetry Module](https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-otel) instruments the NGINX data plane to export traces to a configured collector. Tracing data can be exported to an OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) exporter, such as the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector). This collector can then export data to one or more upstream collectors like [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/), [DataDog](https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/), and many others. This particular model is called the [Agent model](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/deployment/agent/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
NGINX Gateway Fabric supports tracing using [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/). The official [NGINX OpenTelemetry Module](https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-otel) instruments the NGINX data plane to export traces to a configured collector. Tracing data can be used with an OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) exporter, such as the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector). This collector can then export data to one or more upstream collectors like [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/), [DataDog](https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/), and many others. This is called the [Agent model](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/deployment/agent/).
```

Slight rephase to cut down on the repeated use of export/exporter in the same sentence, and removing some unnecessary words.

> In this guide, we are going enable tracing on our HTTPRoutes using NGINX Gateway Fabric. We will use the OpenTelemetry Collector and Jaeger to process and collect our traces.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This guide explains how to enable tracing on HTTPRoutes using NGINX Gateway Fabric. It uses the OpenTelemetry Collector and Jaeger to process and collect the traces.
```

"We" is too informal for documentation: there are a lot of edit suggestions to change this to imperative language.

> ## Installing the Collectors

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Install the Collectors
```

Remove gerund.

> The first step is to install the collectors. NGINX Gateway Fabric will be configured to export to the OpenTelemetry Collector, which is configured to export to Jaeger. This model allows us to easily swap out the visualization collector (Jaeger) for something else if we want to, or add more collectors without needing to reconfigure NGINX Gateway Fabric. It is also possible to configure NGINX Gateway Fabric to export directly to Jaeger, if desired.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The first step is to install the collectors. NGINX Gateway Fabric will be configured to export to the OpenTelemetry Collector, which is configured to export to Jaeger. This model allows the visualization collector (Jaeger) to be swapped with something else, or to add more collectors without needing to reconfigure NGINX Gateway Fabric. It is also possible to configure NGINX Gateway Fabric to export directly to Jaeger.
```

Unnecessary words, informal language.

> First, create the namespace:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Create the namespace:
```

```shell
kubectl create namespace monitoring
```

Download the following files containing the configurations for the collectors:

- {{< download "otel-collector.yaml" "otel-collector.yaml" >}}
- {{< download "jaeger.yaml" "jaeger.yaml" >}}

> {{< note >}}These collectors are for demo purposes and are not tuned for production use.{{< /note >}}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{< note >}}These collectors are for demonstration purposes and are not tuned for production use.{{< /note >}}
```

> and install:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Then install them:
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f otel-collector.yaml -f jaeger.yaml -n monitoring
```

> Ensure that the Pods are running:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Ensure the Pods are running:
```

```shell
kubectl -n monitoring get pods
```

```text
NAME                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
jaeger-8469f69b86-bfpk9          1/1     Running   0          9s
otel-collector-f786b7dfd-h2x9l   1/1     Running   0          9s
```

Once running, you can access the Jaeger dashboard by using port-forwarding in the background:

```shell
kubectl port-forward -n monitoring svc/jaeger 16686:16686 &
```

Visit [http://127.0.0.1:16686](http://127.0.0.1:16686) to view the dashboard.

> ## Enabling Tracing

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Enable tracing
```

Sentence case, remove gerund.

> Enabling tracing requires two pieces of configuration.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To enable tracing, you must configure two resources:
```

> - `NginxProxy`: This resource contains global settings relating to the NGINX data plane. It is created and managed by the [cluster operator](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/), and is referenced in the `parametersRef` field of the GatewayClass. This resource can be created and linked when we install NGINX Gateway Fabric using its helm chart, or it can be added later. In this guide we will install the resource using the helm chart, but will also show what it looks like in case you want to add it after installation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `NginxProxy`: This resource contains global settings relating to the NGINX data plane. It is created and managed by the [cluster operator](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/), and is referenced in the `parametersRef` field of the GatewayClass. This resource can be created and linked when we install NGINX Gateway Fabric using its helm chart, or it can be added later. This guide installs the resource using a Helm chart, but can be used to modify a chart for an existing deployment.
```

The `NginxProxy` resource contains configuration for the collector, and applies to all Gateways and routes under the GatewayClass. It does not enable tracing, but is a prerequisite to the next piece of configuration.

- `ObservabilityPolicy`: This resource is a [Policy](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/policy-attachment/) that targets HTTPRoutes or GRPCRoutes. It is created by the [application developer](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/) and enables tracing for a specific route or routes. It requires the `NginxProxy` resource to exist in order to complete the tracing configuration.

> TODO(sberman): link to reference docs

Reviewer 5: Is the plan to leave this line here until we have the API reference docs generated?

Author: No, I'll remove those before this is merged. If the API docs come later, this doc can be updated.

> TODO(sberman): link to reference docs

Reviewer 4: Just calling out this TODO just in case it gets overlooked, though you might have some local tooling that flags it anyway.

> ### Installing NGINX Gateway Fabric with global tracing config

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Install NGINX Gateway Fabric with global tracing configuration
```

Sentence case, remove gerund.

> {{< note >}}Ensure that you've already [installed the Gateway API resources]({{< relref "installation/installing-ngf/helm.md#installing-the-gateway-api-resources" >}}).{{< /note >}}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{< note >}}Ensure that you [install the Gateway API resources]({{< relref "installation/installing-ngf/helm.md#installing-the-gateway-api-resources" >}}).{{< /note >}}
```

Tense fixes, imperative language.

> Based on the collector we deployed above, we'll create the following `values.yaml` file to install NGINX Gateway Fabric:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Using the previously deployed collector, create the following `values.yaml` file for installing NGINX Gateway Fabric:
```

```yaml
cat <<EOT > values.yaml
nginx:
  config:
    telemetry:
      exporter:
        endpoint: otel-collector.tracing.svc:4317
      spanAttributes:
      - key: cluster-attribute-key
        value: cluster-attribute-value
EOT
```

> We've set the endpoint and added a demo attribute that will be added to all tracing spans.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The endpoint and demo attribute will be added to all tracing spans.
```

To install:

```shell
helm install ngf oci://ghcr.io/nginxinc/charts/nginx-gateway-fabric --create-namespace -n nginx-gateway -f values.yaml
```

> As a result, we should see the following configurations:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You should see the following configuration:
```

```

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.nginx.org/v1alpha1
kind: NginxProxy
metadata:
  name: ngf-proxy-config
spec:
  telemetry:
    exporter:
      endpoint: otel-collector.tracing.svc:4317
    spanAttributes:
    - key: cluster-attribute-key
      value: cluster-attribute-value
```

```shell
kubectl get gatewayclasses.gateway.networking.k8s.io nginx -o yaml
```

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: GatewayClass
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  controllerName: gateway.nginx.org/nginx-gateway-controller
  parametersRef:
    group: gateway.nginx.org
    kind: NginxProxy
    name: ngf-proxy-config
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-05-22T15:18:35Z"
    message: GatewayClass is accepted
    observedGeneration: 1
    reason: Accepted
    status: "True"
    type: Accepted
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-05-22T15:18:35Z"
    message: Gateway API CRD versions are supported
    observedGeneration: 1
    reason: SupportedVersion
    status: "True"
    type: SupportedVersion
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-05-22T15:18:35Z"
    message: parametersRef resource is resolved
    observedGeneration: 1
    reason: ResolvedRefs
    status: "True"
    type: ResolvedRefs
```

> If you already had NGINX Gateway Fabric installed, then you can simply create the `NginxProxy` resource and link it in the GatewayClass `parametersRef` like shown above, using:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you already have NGINX Gateway Fabric installed, then you can create the `NginxProxy` resource and link it to the GatewayClass `parametersRef`:
```

Simplicity is highly subjective, though in general we avoid adjectives altogether.

```shell
kubectl edit gatewayclasses.gateway.networking.k8s.io nginx
```

> Next you'll want to [Expose NGINX Gateway Fabric]({{< relref "installation/expose-nginx-gateway-fabric.md" >}}) and save the public IP address and port of NGINX Gateway Fabric into shell variables:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Next, [Expose NGINX Gateway Fabric]({{< relref "installation/expose-nginx-gateway-fabric.md" >}}) and save the public IP address and port of NGINX Gateway Fabric into shell variables:
```

   ```text
   GW_IP=XXX.YYY.ZZZ.III
   GW_PORT=<port number>
   ```

> Now we can create our application, route, and tracing policy.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can now create the application, route, and tracing policy.
```

### Create the application and route

Create the basic **coffee** application:

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: coffee
spec:
  replicas: 2
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: coffee
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: coffee
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: coffee
        image: nginxdemos/nginx-hello:plain-text
        ports:
        - containerPort: 8080
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: coffee
spec:
  ports:
  - port: 80
    targetPort: 8080
    protocol: TCP
    name: http
  selector:
    app: coffee
EOF
```

> Next we'll create the Gateway resource and HTTPRoute for our app:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Create the Gateway resource and HTTPRoute for the application:
```

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: cafe
spec:
  gatewayClassName: nginx
  listeners:
  - name: http
    port: 80
    protocol: HTTP
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: coffee
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: cafe
  hostnames:
  - "cafe.example.com"
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /coffee
    backendRefs:
    - name: coffee
      port: 80
EOF
```

> Let's ensure that traffic can flow to our application.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Check that traffic can flow to the application.
```

{{< note >}}If you have a DNS record allocated for `cafe.example.com`, you can send the request directly to that hostname, without needing to resolve.{{< /note >}}

```shell
curl --resolve cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT:$GW_IP http://cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT/coffee
```

> We should see a response from the coffee Pod.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You should receive a response from the coffee Pod.
```

```text
Server address: 10.244.0.69:8080
Server name: coffee-6b8b6d6486-k5w5w
URI: /coffee
```

> Assuming that you have access to the [Jaeger dashboard](http://127.0.0.1:16686) from earlier in the guide, you shouldn't see any tracing information yet. This means we need to create our `ObservabilityPolicy`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You shouldn't see any information from the [Jaeger dashboard](http://127.0.0.1:16686) yet: you need to create the `ObservabilityPolicy`.
```

### Create the ObservabilityPolicy

> To enable tracing for our coffee HTTPRoute, we create the following policy:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To enable tracing for the coffee HTTPRoute, create the following policy:
```

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.nginx.org/v1alpha1
kind: ObservabilityPolicy
metadata:
  name: coffee
spec:
  targetRefs:
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: HTTPRoute
    name: coffee
  tracing:
    strategy: ratio
    ratio: 75
    spanAttributes:
    - key: coffee-key
      value: coffee-value
EOF
```

> This policy attaches to the coffee HTTPRoute and enables ratio-based tracing, where 75% of requests will be sampled. We've also included a span attribute to add extra data to the spans.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This policy attaches to the coffee HTTPRoute and enables ratio-based tracing, sampling 75% of requests. The `spanAttributes` provide extra data.
```

> Let's check the status of the policy:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Check the status of the policy:
```

```shell
kubectl describe observabilitypolicies.gateway.nginx.org coffee
```

```text
Status:
  Ancestors:
    Ancestor Ref:
      Group:      gateway.networking.k8s.io
      Kind:       HTTPRoute
      Name:       coffee
      Namespace:  default
    Conditions:
      Last Transition Time:  2024-05-23T18:13:03Z
      Message:               Policy is accepted
      Observed Generation:   1
      Reason:                Accepted
      Status:                True
      Type:                  Accepted
    Controller Name:         gateway.nginx.org/nginx-gateway-controller
```

> The policy is accepted, so now let's send some more traffic. Run the following command multiple times.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `message` field shows the policy is accepted. Run the next command multiple times to create new traffic.
```

```shell
curl --resolve cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT:$GW_IP http://cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT/coffee
```

> Once complete, let's refresh the Jaeger dashboard. We should now see a service entry called `ngf:default:cafe`, and a few traces. The service name by default is `ngf:<gateway-namespace>:<gateway-name>`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Once complete, refresh the Jaeger dashboard. We should see a service entry called `ngf:default:cafe`, and a few traces. The default service name is `ngf:<gateway-namespace>:<gateway-name>`.
```

{{<img src="img/jaeger-trace-overview.png" alt="">}}

<br></br>

> If we click into one of the traces, we can see the attributes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Select a trace to view the attributes.
```

Small thing, but "select" is preferred as it's input-agnostic. Click presumes the user is operating a mouse.

{{<img src="img/jaeger-trace-attributes.png" alt="">}}

> As you can see, the trace includes the attribute from the global NginxProxy resource, set by the cluster operator, as well as the attribute from the ObservabilityPolicy, set by the application developer.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The trace includes the attribute from the global NginxProxy resource as well as the attribute from the ObservabilityPolicy.
```

I've removed mention of user personas because they do not appear anywhere else in this documentation, and in context, the reader has assumed both roles. The contemporary approach for writing docs is task-oriented use cases that don't presume a specific persona or role for the person running through them.

> ## Further Reading

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Further reading
```

> TODO(sberman): link to reference docs again

Reviewer 4: Calling out this TODO again just in case it's missed.
